Hey guys welcome back to the course so in this lecture we're going to talk about another common scenario
that could happen in the worst case scenario.
This is when you have a freelancer or a contractor or outsource firm and they're consistently missing
deadlines.
Now in general if you're outsourcing that you need to know that you should be at least a little bit
flexible with your deadlines.
And if you're really a stickler for time and when things get done then you need to be working with someone
you at least have a rapport with or someone you know shows up on time.
Typically when you do the $50 test I like to give freelancers a real small segment of things to work
on just too many other things test to see how quickly they can get it done whether or not they can match
the deadline that they themselves have made.
So if you follow the $50 test you'll probably know whether or not this person hits their deadlines or
not.
Now of course it can always happen that you know the did perfectly on the $50 test but then later they
have family issues or something else is happening that creates some tension with the deadlines.
So first off you understand if they are missing their deadlines there's typically only three things.
In my experience that are happening.
One is that they are having something like a personal emergency or they're having to spend a lot of
their time elsewhere in life it could be another project.
It could be moving it could be traveling it could be something else that's sucking up their time.
The second thing could be that they have overextended themselves in terms of the project.
It's a lot more complicated than they thought.
And they're finding or that they're finding it's a lot more tedious than they thought.
So their previous estimates of their timeline might be inaccurate because they're finding out that it's
a lot harder.
And the last thing is that you might just have a freelancer who is not particularly motivated to finish
your project on time.
This is the least likely scenario because if you did a good job of looking at their past work vetting
them assessing them and making a good decision about a freelancer and you did the $50 test you should
know whether or not this person is mature and whether or not they're going to run out of gas halfway
through their project or just from the get go not be serious about delivering on time.
So the likelihood that it's just an amateur freelancer.
It's possible if you pick someone who has no reviews they have no skin in the game.
There might be even just testing out this whole freelancer thing and they realize halfway through that
they just can't do it anymore.
The best way to get around this is just to do some basic vetting.
Make sure you have lots of beer on your bids and your projects and make sure you pick someone who has
a track record now dealing with someone who has an external life event that's a lot trickier.
You need to basically have an open communication with them if they're missing deadlines to figure out
what it is that's causing them to miss the deadlines.
And if they do tell you that it's a family issue.
Make sure that you're skeptical when I say skeptical.
I mean it is very plausible that they have family issues that does happen quite often.
However those things typically don't just come up out of the blue and if they do and the person is a
good freelancer they would have told you every step of the way they wouldn't just tell you after you
asked why are you missing your deadlines.
Let's say you're freelancer's wife is having a baby.
They would probably tell you upfront when that's happening that they're pregnant.
They're expecting they might even tell you a couple of days afterwards.
The point is they will tell you you don't have to ask.
Now if they keep telling you oh family event Oh family event it might be the case that they're just
using that as a coverall excuse to cover the fact that they're just missing their deadlines.
A lot of times they'll use it to cover up what's happening which is that they're spending time on another
project.
What you need to do is you need to be frank with them and if it is the case you're getting a repeated
excuse saying I have a family event or a family problem.
You need to say to them are you missing deadlines because you have other project work.
Explain to them that you understand that freelancers take on multiple projects at once and then just
ask them the question if it is the case that they are working on other projects that you need to make
sure that they understand that they misrepresented themselves upfront.
You need to make sure that they understand that this is not OK and that they should have told you beforehand.
In general you should always make sure that the person is responsive and the person is not overly busy.
And we deal with that previously in the course by looking at things like responsiveness by looking at
reviews looking at their track records giving them small pieces of things to work on.
And if you do that you can just figure out very quickly whether or not there's someone who does take
on other projects that they don't tell you about.
The point here though is that you need to facilitate communication as much as possible.
If you do run into a landmine like this they're not doing their delivery deadlines and they admit to
you that they have another project and need to have a frank with them about rescheduling your deadlines
and potentially having monetary damages you might need to explain to them that every time they miss
a deadline this is what it cost you and use that as a basic way of incentivizing them to re prioritize
your project over the other.
Now there's really not a ton you can do if this is the case that they have another project and you're
in it for the long haul you're in a project that's a long term really you can just try to make sure
that they de-prioritize the other one or at least understand when they're done with the other one or
why they thought that they could handle two at the same time but they can't.
And then just try to re correct your course being flexible being communicative.
Those are the things that are going to help you get through this.
There are also the things that are going to help you prevent this from or from becoming a big problem.
Now the other scenario was that they found out this is a lot more complicated and that's not something
that's going to pop up very quickly.
It's usually something that if they've missed a couple deadlines you need to ask them why they're missing
them and you need to understand what's happening.
And a lot of times they'll explain to you upfront that these sections took a lot longer and always trying
to play them down and say oh it's just because of this one section yada yada yada.
I'll be on schedule.
Going forward you need to explain to them that it's not necessarily that they hit their deadlines it's
that you know when they're going to be finished again don't ever try to outsource when you have hard
core deadlines meaning if you miss a deadline the whole ship falls apart.
Your entire company collapses.
You need to always outsource when you have a least a little bit of flexibility or a really strong rapport
with the person you're working with.
So as long as they understand that it's not about deadlines it's about when you should expect the work
to be done then you can open up in a kind of a communication about readjusting your deadlines readjusting
your expectations and then that should be the case that it should become easier.
The only downside to this is you might just have to downgrade your expectations as to how fast your
project gets done.
And to be honest this happens all the time in projects all the time.
People jump in and they realize it's a lot more complicated than they thought and it might take an extra
week two weeks or even a month.
Web projects online projects a lot of times they are very very hard to predict upfront how hard it's
going to be you just don't know how complex something is going to be and that's how you spend a lot
of time with it.
So try to be flexible.
Try to establish as much communication as you can try to figure out what exactly is causing the delay
and then try to limit it.
Once you've figured out what exactly the problem is if it's something that's unfixable Well then you
probably saw this coming down the road and you probably if you've used a milestone system have prevented
yourself from taking a large hit on it.
But in the vast majority of cases it can be fixed it can be remedied.
You might just have to downgrade your expectations about when the project's going to be done.
Questions Comments anything just post in the group discussion.
See next lecture.